JEREMY: Functional
programming languages
have a reputation
for being complex.
This is probably deserved,
but it's off-putting
to novice programmers.
One of the most intimidating
features about Haskell
is monads.
In this video we're going to
delve into them in more detail
to try and understand what
monads are really all about.
Firstly, cue some
relaxing music.
Now let's start off with
the following high level
definition.
Monads allow
sequencing of function
calls to be enforced
by the type system.
Is that enough?
Well, perhaps it's enough to
be getting on with for now.
Monads allow computations
to be chained together.
Effectively, a monad is
a computation pattern
as Katie from Facebook
told us last week.
To reassure you
further, we've already
encountered at least
two examples of monads
on the course.
The IO monad.
In week two of the course
we studied IO actions
like putStrLn and getLine.
We looked at the do construct
for sequencing these actions,
so the result of one IO
action could become the input
of a subsequent IO action.
For example, look at this code.
This is a use of the IO monad
wrapped up as a do block.
Secondly, the maybe monad.
In week three of the course
we studied maybe values, which
could be Just x or Nothing.
These are used to represent
values from computations
that may fail.
Again, we can use
do blocks to order
a sequence of computations
on maybe values.
This is the maybe monad.
Look at this block.
What value does it return?
Note that the
return keyword here
put the final computed value
in an appropriate context.
More details in the next step.
Here's another do block.
What value does it return?
The Nothing value
propagates through the
do block and is returned.
We are going to investigate
the properties of monads
over the next few steps on the
course to try and understand
them in some more detail.
However, I hope it's
moderately reassuring
to realize that we've already
encountered monads in Haskell
and understood
them at some level.